feat: proposals for implementing msg cache to resources (#66)
emqx/eip: active/0021-msg-batch-for-resources.md

# The Message Batch for Resources

```
Author: <Shawn Liu> <liuxy@emqx.io>
Status: Draft
Created: 2022-07-11
```

## Abstract

This proposal suggests adding the message batching mechanism to the `emqx_resource` layer for emqx data integration.

## Motivation

We need a batching mechanism for all the external resources (MySQL, MongoDB, HTTP, Kafka, etc.) to enhance the throughput.

> In 4.x the batching mechanism is implemented by adding a `batcher` process before calling each

Author: Yes I will update this.

The purpose of message queue is to cache messages locally (possibly disk or memory) when the external resource service is interrupted, and then replay messages from the message queue after the resource is back to service.

In emqx 4.x and previous versions, only a 2 drivers implemented the message queue, they are Kafka and MQTT Bridge (based on `replayq`).

In 5.0 we suggest **build the message queue as part of the resource layer**, and then implement the message batching as well as the sync/async querying mode based on this message queue. This way we have the advantage of no need to change any of the drivers.

## Design

### RocksDB vs. ReplayQ

There are two choices to implement the message queue. One is the mnesia database using RocksDB as the backend, and the other is the [replayq](https://github.com/emqx/replayq).

We prefer the `replayq`, mainly because in this feature messages are always added and accessed in a queue, we never access data by primary keys like a KV database. This is exactly the applicable scenario of `replayq`. The data files will be stored in the specified directory of the local file system, which is very simple.

> The `replayq` was added to the Erlang Kafka driver in 2018, it has experienced several emqx versions and has been proved to be very stable.

Author: What limitations does it have?

The "resource management" part is the old resource layer, and remains unchanged as before, which is responsible for resource management operations.

#### Sending Messages through the Resource Workers

![New Data Plane](0021-assets/resource-new-arch-data-plane.png)

#### Managing Resources through the Resource Manager

![New Data Plane](0021-assets/resource-new-arch-control-plane.png)

### Pool of Resource Workers with ReplayQs

In the current implementation, each time a resource is created, a resource manager process will be created for each resource ID, which is responsible for maintaining the relevant state of the resource. See the code of `emqx_resource_manager` module for details.

After the implementation of message queue is added, we also create a resource worker pool each time a resource is created, which is responsible for the process of accessing external resources and message sending.

The following figure is a schematic diagram of the resource worker pool. Each worker maintains a ReplayQ:

![Resource Workers with ReplayQs](0021-assets/resource-workers.png)

> The messages are first saved by the worker to the queue (which can be memory or disk queue), and then according to the batching policy, the worker takes the message out of the queue and sends it to the corresponding driver through the connector callback modules.

Reviewer: Speak of using QUEUE. we could have producer and consumer.

Resource worker as producer push data to the QUEUE.
Another process Driver worker or the batcher periodically pop(or just read) data from the queue from head so that Producer and Consumer they will not interfere each other.

Also we should ensure the data poped could only disappear after the data has been written to the db backend so we will not loss data in case backend worker crash or restart?

Author: Good suggestion, It is good to have producer workers and consumer workers. I will update the doc for this.

For the `pop`, if I understand correctly, the `replayq:pop()` won't delete the items from disk until they get ACKed using `replayq:ack()`. I will check this later, if it doesn't work as expected, I will first `peek` and then `pop`.

Here is the sequences for querying a resource after the resource workers are added:

> ![Resource Worker Sequences](0021-assets/resource-worker-sequences.drawio.png)

Reviewer: about the `connection process` in the chart, is it the resource connection process or mqtt client connection process?

Author: It's the MQTT connection process, I'll update the chart to clarify.

The `RocksDB` was added into emqx 5.0 as the backend of mneisa, it is a NIF of the upstream RocksDB written in C (https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb).

The persistent message queue feature is exactly the applicable scenario of `ReplayQ`, as messages are always added and accessed in a FIFO manner, we never access data by primary keys like a KV database. 
The data files will be stored in the specified directory of the local file system, which is very simple.

But there's some limitations in `ReplayQ`, mainly because it is a simple queue maintained in a single erlang process, it doesn't support concurrently accessing by multiple processes. So we may need some work to improve that.

Another way is implement a persistent queue based on RocksDB. It also need some more works.

## Configuration Changes

Some new (optional) config entries are added to the data-bridges, authentication and authorization components:

- **max_batch_num**: the maximum messages can be sent in a single batch.
- **batch_interval**: the maximum time in milliseconds the worker will wait before sending out a batch.

> - **query_mode**: if set to true, the caller of `emqx_resource:query/3` will be blocked until
> the driver returns or timeouts; if set to false, the `emqx_resource:query/3` returns immediately.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **query_mode**: if set to sync, the caller of `emqx_resource:query/3` will be blocked until
the driver returns or timeouts; if set to async, the `emqx_resource:query/3` returns immediately.
```
